CPD-1: CPD Process
==================

Metadata
--------

* CPD Version: 1
* Status: Accepted

Description
-----------
Commissaire Proposal Documents (CPD) provide a consistent way to propose large
changes to the project for review.

Rationale
---------
Most changes to Commissaire are small, iterative enhancements and bug fixes.
When a larger change to the project may make sense a CPD provides a formalized
way to propose the change, request review, and refine the idea until it is
either accepted or rejected.

Design
------

CPD Process
~~~~~~~~~~~

The following process should be followed when a CPD is needed:

1. Open up an Issue with a brief description
2. Note in the Issue that a CPD will be created
3. Create an initial CPD
4. Update the Issue with a link to the CPD and request feedback
5. Update the CPD as needed and ask for feedback
6. Accepted/Closed Phase
  * If 75% or more of the active development team give the CPD a ``:+1:`` it is Approved
  * If 50% or more of the active development team disagrees with the CPD it is Closed
  * If the person proposing the CPD no longer wishes to continue they can request it to be Closed
  * If none of the above is met the cycle can continue to 5.
7. The current development lead(s) pull in the CPD to the docs folder and update the status
8. The current development lead(s) update the issue with the result

Naming
~~~~~~
Each CPD will have a unique number associated with it. As an example, this
CPD will have the number ``1`` and should be referenced as ``CPD-1``. The CPD number
shall be the same as any issue number opened. As an example, if there is an
issue #10 that needs a larger design then the CPD would be ``CPD-10``.

Outline of a CPD
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
====================== ============= =============
Label                  Parent Label  Description
====================== ============= =============
Name                   None          CPD name. Ex: ``CPD-1``.
Metadata               Name          CPD CPD Version, Status (``Open``, ``Closed``, ``Accepted``)
Description            Name          Short description of the CPD.
Rational               Name          Why there is a need to make the change.
Design                 Name          Deep dive into changes. May have subsections.
Checklist              Name          Important items to note.
User Story             Name          User story that would be used to implement the change.
Acceptance Criteria    Name          Criteria that must be met for the change to be considered complete.
References             Name          Any helpful external links.
====================== ============= =============

CPD Status
~~~~~~~~~~
The status of a CPD will be changed to Accepted if and when 75% or more of the
active core development team gives the CPD a ``:+1:``. It is the job of at least
one of the development leads to update the CPD to Accepted status and note it is
accepted in the related issue(s).

Checklist
---------
* breaks API backward compatibility
* breaks user interaction backward compatibility
* requires new or replaces current libraries

User Story
----------
As a developer on Commissaire
I want a formalized way to propose large changes
so that the larger group can help refine the ultimate solution.

Acceptance Criteria
-------------------
* Verify that a template for proposals is created
* Verify that a proposal that describes the process is created
* Verify that documentation is updated

References
----------
* `Kubernetes Proposals <https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/docs/proposals>`_
* `Golang Proposals <https://github.com/golang/proposal>`_
* `PEP Proposal <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0001/>`_
* `JSR <https://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/all>`_
